Download Link: https://assignmentchef.com/product/solved-ista-130-programming-assignment-5-while-loops-and-if-statements
<br>
Please read the instructions below carefully and follow them closely. All problems (and parts of problems) are required except as noted below.




For any functions you are asked to write, you must use the exact function names given in the descriptions, and you must have parameters in the order shown in the description.




To people who know what default values and/or keyword arguments are: do not use default values and do not use keyword arguments.  If you don’t know what these are it is unlikely you’ll do it by accident.  Ask us if you’re not sure.







<h1>Preparation</h1>

<strong> </strong>

We have seen the random module in action, but before you begin working on your program you may want to practice a bit.  In a Python shell:




import the random module and do the following:




&gt;&gt;&gt; help(random.randint) # read the documentation

&gt;&gt;&gt; random.randint(0,1)  # repeat this until you know what it does

&gt;&gt;&gt; random.randint(0,3)  # continue experimenting

&gt;&gt;&gt; random.randint(4,6)

&gt;&gt;&gt; random.randint(1,100)

Now let’s meet random.seed:




&gt;&gt;&gt; random.seed(100)




Next, 5 times in a row run this line: random.randint(0, 10)

Each time write down the random number.

Exit the Python shell, open a new shell, and enter: random.seed(100) 5 times in a row run this line: random.randint(0, 10)

Each time write down the random number.  Compare to the numbers you already wrote down.




Random numbers are generated by a complicated mathematical process.  By setting a seed value, we can ensure that the exact same sequence of “random” numbers will be generated. This is very useful for testing code.

<h1>Dice Game:  Pig (100 points)</h1>

<strong> </strong>

For this program you will build a simple dice game called Pig.  In this version of Pig, two players alternate turns.  Players each begin the game with a score of 0.  During a turn a player will roll a six-sided die one or more times, summing up the resulting rolls.  At the end of the player’s turn the sum for that turn is added to the player’s total game score.




If at any time a player rolls a 1, the player’s turn immediately ends and he/she earns 0 points for that turn (i.e. nothing is added to the player’s total game score).  This is called “pig”.  After every roll that isn’t a 1, the player may choose to either end the turn, adding the sum from the current turn to his/her total game score, or roll again in an attempt to increase the sum.




The first player to 50 points wins the game.




<h1>Details</h1>

<strong> </strong>

Open a text editor and create a new file called pig.py.  In the file:




<ol>

 <li>Write a function called print_scores that has four parameters – these hold, in this order, the name of the first player (a string), his/her score (an int), the second player’s name (a string), and score (an int). The function will:

  <ol>

   <li>Print the following message, using the current parameter values for the player names and scores (NOT necessarily Ziggy, 18, Elmer, and 23):</li>

  </ol></li>

</ol>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 18 Elmer: 23 — </strong>

<ul>

 <li>Print an empty line before this line.</li>

 <li>There is a single tab between SCORES and the name of player 1.</li>

 <li>There is a single tab between player 1’s score and player 2’s name.</li>

 <li>Every other gap is a single space.</li>

</ul>




<ol start="2">

 <li>Write a function called check_for_winner that has two parameters: a name (a string) and a score (an int):

  <ol>

   <li>If the score is 50 or more print the following message (using the current parameter value for the name, not Ziggy):</li>

  </ol></li>

</ol>

<strong>THE WINNER IS: Ziggy!!!!!</strong>

<ol>

 <li>The function  returns True if  the  score  is  50  or  more,  otherwise  it returns  False.</li>

</ol>







<ol start="3">

 <li>Write a function called roll_again that has a single string parameter to hold a player’s name. In the function:

  <ol>

   <li>Enter a while loop which repeats the following steps: Ask whether the player would like to roll again, using the following message:</li>

  </ol></li>

</ol>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N)</strong>

Ø<strong>    </strong>There is a single space after (Y/N).

<ul>

 <li>If the  player  answers  with  Y,  y,  N,  or  n,  exit  from  the loop. Otherwise print the following message (replacing XXX with the user’s entry):</li>

</ul>

<strong>I don’t understand: “XXX”. Please enter either “Y” or “N”.</strong>

<ol>

 <li>The function returns either True or False depending on whether the player wants to roll again.</li>

</ol>




<ol start="4">

 <li>Write a  function  called  play_turn that  has  a  single  string  parameter , which holds a player’s name.  The function will:

  <ol>

   <li>Print the player’s  name  as  shown  in  the  following  example:</li>

  </ol></li>

</ol>

<strong>———- Ziggy’s turn ———-</strong>

<ul>

 <li>There are 10 hyphens on either side of the message.</li>

</ul>

<ol>

 <li>Initialize a variable to keep track of the points the player earns on this turn.</li>

 <li>The function then enters a while loop in which the player attempts to earn points. It repeats the following steps:

  <ul>

   <li>Generate a random integer between 1 and 6 inclusive using the random • Print a message displaying the roll as shown in the following example:</li>

  </ul></li>

</ol>

<strong>&lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 4 &gt;&gt;&gt;</strong>

<ul>

 <li>Put a tab to the left of the first angle bracket.</li>

</ul>

<ul>

 <li>If the roll is a 1: Ø Print the  following  message:</li>

</ul>

<strong>!!! PIG! No points earned, sorry Ziggy !!!</strong>

v Put a tab to the left of the first exclamation point.

<ul>

 <li>Make sure the player earns no points for the turn.</li>

 <li>Make a change to ensure you exit the loop or exit directly.</li>

 <li>Use the following message to pause the program until the user is ready to continue:</li>

</ul>

<strong>(enter to continue)</strong>

<ul>

 <li>If the roll is not a 1:

  <ul>

   <li>Add the roll to the player’s points earned for the turn. Ø Print the player’s turn total as in the following example:</li>

  </ul></li>

</ul>

<strong>Points: 12 </strong>

v Put a tab to the left of the word Points.

<ul>

 <li>Use the roll_again function to ask the player if he/she would like to roll again.</li>

 <li>If not, make a change to ensure you exit the loop or exit directly.</li>

</ul>

<ol>

 <li>Make sure that you returned the number of points earned by the player for this turn in all cases.</li>

</ol>




<ol start="5">

 <li>In main:

  <ol>

   <li>Get an integer to use for the seed function from the user with the prompt:</li>

  </ol></li>

</ol>

<strong>Enter seed value:</strong>

<ol>

 <li>Pass seed the value retrieved from the user.</li>

 <li>Print two blank lines followed by the title of the game:</li>

</ol>

<strong>Pig Dice</strong>

<ol>

 <li>Ask the user to enter the first player’s name with this prompt:</li>

</ol>

<strong>Enter name for player 1:</strong>

<ol>

 <li>Ask the user to enter the second player’s name with this prompt:</li>

</ol>

<strong>Enter name for player 2: </strong>

<ol>

 <li>Print a greeting message in the following form:</li>

</ol>

<strong>Hello Ziggy and Elmer, welcome to Pig Dice!</strong>

<ul>

 <li>Put a tab to the left of Hello.</li>

</ul>

<ol>

 <li>Initialize the players’ scores to 0.</li>

 <li>Print their scores using the print_scores</li>

 <li>Enter a while loop in which repeats the following steps:

  <ul>

   <li>Call the play_turn function for player 1 and add any earned points to his/her total score.</li>

   <li>Print the players’ scores (use the appropriate function).</li>

   <li>Check whether player 1 won the game (use the appropriate function).</li>

   <li>If player 1 didn’t win, call the play_turn function for player 2 and add any earned points to his/her total.

    <ul>

     <li>Print the players’ scores.</li>

     <li>Check whether player 2 won the game.</li>

    </ul></li>

   <li>If either player won the game, ensure that you exit the while</li>

  </ul></li>

</ol>




<ol start="6">

 <li>Verify that your documentation makes sense and that you’ve added documentation to each of your functions.</li>

</ol>




<ol start="7">

 <li>Verify that your program works properly.</li>

</ol>




<ol start="8">

 <li>Upload your file to the Program 5 dropbox folder on D2L.</li>

</ol>




<h1>Example Output</h1>




Below is an example of the output from running the finished program.  If you enter 125 for the seed and make the same choices as the players do in this example your output should look like this.  Printed output is in blue, user input is in green.




<strong>Enter seed value: </strong><strong>125</strong>

<strong> </strong>

<strong> </strong>

<strong>Pig Dice </strong>

<strong>Enter name for player 1: </strong><strong>Ziggy </strong>

<strong>Enter name for player 2: </strong><strong>Elmer</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>    Hello Ziggy and Elmer, welcome to Pig Dice! </strong>

<strong> </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 0 Elmer: 0 — ———- Ziggy’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 2 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 2 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 2 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 4 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 5 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 9 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>N </strong>

<strong> </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 9 Elmer: 0 — ———- Elmer’s turn ———-    &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 3 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>     Points: 3 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>     &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 5 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>     Points: 8 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>     &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 6 &gt;&gt;&gt;    Points: 14 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>     &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 2 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>     Points: 16 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>N </strong>

<strong> </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 9 Elmer: 16 — ———- Ziggy’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 3 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 3 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 2 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 5 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 5 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 10 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 3 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 13 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>   </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 5 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 18 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>N</strong>

<strong>  </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 27 Elmer: 16 — </strong>

<strong>———- Elmer’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 6 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 6 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong>

<strong>———- Elmer’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 1 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>    !!! PIG! No points earned, sorry Elmer !!! </strong>

<strong>(enter to continue) </strong>

<strong>  </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 27 Elmer: 16 — </strong>

<strong>———- Ziggy’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 1 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>    !!! PIG! No points earned, sorry Ziggy!!! </strong>

<strong>(enter to continue) </strong>

<strong>  </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 27 Elmer: 16 — </strong>

<strong>———- Elmer’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Elmer rolls a 6 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>    Points: 6 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Elmer? (Y/N) </strong><strong>N</strong><strong>  </strong>

<strong>      </strong>

<strong>— SCORES Ziggy: 27 Elmer: 22 — </strong>

<strong>———- Ziggy’s turn ———- </strong>

<strong>    &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 6 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 6 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 2 &gt;&gt;&gt; </strong>

<strong>    Points: 8 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 4 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 12 </strong>

<strong>Roll again, Ziggy? (Y/N) </strong><strong>Y</strong><strong>       &lt;&lt;&lt; Ziggy rolls a 5 &gt;&gt;&gt;     Points: 17 </strong>

and so on…


